
This proposal concerns testing the standard LambdaCDM model of cosmology using tomographic weak lensing, specifically using the ESO public survey KiDS. Weak lensing measures the clustering of matter, irrespective of whether it is baryonic or not. Combined with redshift information of the lensed galaxies, such data can also constrain the growth rate, a key cosmology observable. Currently, the most stringent measurements are those from KiDS (H++17), based on 450 square degrees of imaging data from the VST. More results are expected in the coming year from competing surveys (DES and HSC) as well as further KiDS data.

Intriguingly, the KiDS-450 result is in tension with the best-fit cosmology parameters from the CMB (Planck 2015): matter appears to be less clustered than this standard LCDM model predicts. A careful analysis of the potential sources of systematic error shows that this is dominated by the photometric redshifts which are used to assign galaxies to tomographic bins.

* little table with breakdown of errors on S8? shear (stat); shear (sys); nz (stat, DIR and CC), nz(sys,DIR and CC) ?

We have two independent methods for measuring n(z), which agree within errors. The next step is to improve their accuracy and precision.
DIR is a direct calibration of the mapping from colour space to redshifs, using spectroscopic redshifts as training. It requires spectroscopic data that cover the full *magnitude range* of the KiDS data.

CC uses clustering correlation with redshift slices. It requires a spectroscopic survey that spans the full *redshift range* of the KiDS galaxies. Currently we only have such data over 1.5 square degrees. Increasing the area by a factor of ten is required to reduce the statistical error to the same level as DIR and make it a subdominant part of the overall error budget of the cosmological analysis. *Banana plot to show this*

For the KiDS-450 analysis we used optical data only; we are in the process of adding in the five near-IR bands ZYJKH from the VIKING survey, which requires VISTA images on spectroscopic redshift calibration fields. In December we obtained DDT observations of two DEEP2 fields with VISTA, and we show preliminary results below. This experiment demonstrates the improvement that can be gained by moving from four to nine photometric bands. Currently this calibration is limited by cosmic variance, and we request two more deep fields here.

The KiDS footprint does not overlap with suitable spectroscopic surveys. Rather than embarking on a massive spectroscopy campaign on KiDS fields, we have therefore observed deep spectroscopic survey fields with KiDS-like VST imaging to establish this calibration. We now wish to extend this strategy to the five near-IR bands as well.

For CC


quantify how much area needed. Used 1.5 sqdeg for K450.
CC error needs to come down so complementary analysis has proper value
argue VIPERS OK even though redshift-selected; can combine with low-z info from GAMA.


